lookouts
we all spot errors from time to time
mistakes and misconceptions in our own
lives and work and that in the work of
others
i realized even as a child somewhat
precocious perhaps and interested in
science that newspapers and the media
routinely got wrong matters of basic
science and i thought then as i do now
if they're wrong about what i do know
why would it be any different in the
areas i know much less about spotting
errors is the route to making progress
in improving one's creativity it is only
if the error is identified first that it
can be corrected and progress made
but to identify the error someone needs
to see it to have a place to stand and
observe that something is not quite
right as a physicist you are standing in
the existing knowledge that is physics
as we understand it and so it is far
easier for you to spot an error in some
new invention
you understand the laws of
thermodynamics and this machine purports
to be able to move without an energy
source forever
you know there must be an error and
you've just found it a battery must be
hidden and it turns out it was or that's
a version of a crooks radiometer and no
perpetual motion machine it's a heat
engine of a kind but to spot this you
need to stand atop the knowledge of
physics so you can identify the error
and see a little further than others who
might lack that knowledge physicists can
spot a lot of errors because everything
must obey the laws of physics so if a
geologist is claiming some phenomenon
violates a known physical law a
physicist can spot that for rocks obey
laws of physics
so to chemicals and living things the
climate obeys the laws of physics
everything made of matter obeys the laws
of physics giving physicists a view of
reality from a high place they can spot
a lot of errors far off
but so too can those versed in
mathematics and epistemology and reason
and particular areas of philosophy with
each domain added to one's knowledge we
begin to ascend to a higher and higher
view from which to observe the rest we
never get so high as to escape error
quite the opposite the higher we climb
the more errors we can see and the more
we understand errors can be made until
we realize
error is just the natural state of
things i've been reading more than my
usual number of popular science books
recently and i've gone back to re-read
some more
popular science books can be inspiring
my list of favorite authors are almost
all popular science writers
i've realized now that there are at
least two kinds of reading one can
engage in
there's casual reading and then there's
careful reading
almost all the popular science books i
read i read and have read casually this
means i keep focused on it and i do
enjoy it after all if i didn't enjoy it
i'd put it down perhaps never to pick it
up again and during the reading i
mentally note where i broadly agree and
disagree and i extract from it anything
that seems new to me and does not
obviously contradict what i already know
from elsewhere and which perhaps seems
to make more sense but then there are
careful readings
a careful reading is where you're taking
notes and you're also taking the book a
sentence at a time checking it mentally
against what you know and what you've
also read throughout the rest of the
book and you are checking for errors and
contradictions contradictions with what
you know and what was already said in
the rest of the book contradictions one
presumes the author did not intend such
a reading takes some work and i've
noticed this myself because having
casually read some books and then gone
back and carefully read them i spot
errors i never realized the first time
around what i guess in many cases is
that such contradictions creep into many
otherwise good science books for at
least one reason among perhaps many and
this one reason is
lack of a coherent world view i've been
speaking lately on my podcast about many
things beginning with m it seems
morality mathematics metaphysics minds
multiverses mistakes and many
misconceptions
even some music
i don't know why so many deep areas of
our intellectual life contain the letter
m perhaps it's because um is a sound we
make when thinking about such deep
things when in conversation
hmm what is the answer hmm that's an
interesting point
metaphysics you say
and i realized in reading and re-reading
those popular science books and then
considering other things like scientific
journal articles newspaper pieces
articles on social media and youtube
videos explaining stuff and the list is
long that when they touched on those
things as well as everything else there
was a technique i found helpful for
locating the mistakes
something prior to those m's
a lookout if you will
l comes before m after all before you
get to m you can't forget l
l m n o p
l is the lookout it's the place you
stand to see it all to see the landscape
before you mathematical landscapes
metaphysical landscapes moral landscapes
and more but how you see these things
and whether you can spot a landscape of
mistakes and misconceptions depends on
where you stand where your lookout is
and how high it might be
you should have a lookout you should
understand your lookout it is your
outlook it is your world view could it
be possible to have a lookout that
brings together philosophy physics
epistemology mathematics computation and
even more can it be these subjects can
cohere in a way that can make sense
can one find a place to stand a
worldview is not a religion or even a
set of beliefs it is quite the opposite
to those in many ways those are fixed
ideas there is a reason the beliefs of
religion are known as dogmas and beliefs
are beliefs because one thinks they've
found the truth and they need to search
no further they need to believe in those
things
but a worldview it provides a way of
seeing things a view a perspective
an outlook on reality
the view is what you used to see in
australia we have many beautiful
lookouts as i'm sure many places around
the world do
the lookout is the place you stand and
look out to see what you see
the grand view but the lookout itself
need not be fixed people routinely build
towers on lookouts and provide stairs to
hire grander vistas you can use your
naked eyes or you can be there at night
you can move and see more have
binoculars have a telescope you can
change your place and change parts of
your lookout or even all of your lookout
and gain a better vantage point and more
of an understanding of the landscape
but you need some kind of lookout if
you're going to navigate your way
and one should aim for something
coherent and broadly encompassing a
place to stand and see as much as
possible as i said l comes before m so
without a working lookout your
description of each m from mathematics
through to metaphysics and morality and
more will be much much more messy
l is always prior to understanding those
m's sure you can see ms from anywhere at
all but you'll never see as much or as
far lookouts are called lookouts for a
reason a lookout provides an outlook and
outlooks can be better or worse
nicer is better more optimistic
lmno lookouts make nicer outlooks
lookout can also mean look out be
careful be critical
but you are there to be inspired first
and foremost at your lookout from where
you stand the best outlooks see the
furthest not to predict it in most cases
but to see the possibilities of what is
there and what may yet be discovered
go higher to see further that's the
thing about any lookout in theory one
can construct a tower ever higher to see
ever further the lookout provides your
outlook it can be short and squat and
you can spend your time looking
proverbially down at the metaphorically
less significant or ever higher and
grander to those things that touch
everything else
at a good lookout you should of course
watch out for the edge the edge of what
we know
and see perhaps some dangers in our
circumstance
you are after all up high if you've done
this right so be careful be critical but
remember to be creative but in any case
you need a lookout a world view perhaps
even at that lookout be yourself a
lighthouse
enlighten and engage don't just look out
but be someone to be sought out and
provide some light amidst what might be
a competing darkness
optimism is a kind of lighthouse at our
lookout in a sea of pessimism
it allows one to see further and a
little better and it allows others to
see better too
to navigate a better way to be a kind of
protection against more dangerous ideas
david deutsch's worldview provides a
kind of protection it's rather like a
martial art but not just any it is the
brazilian jiu-jitsu of ways of looking
out at reality or better yet it's mixed
martial arts it's the deepest and
broadest combining the best of all it
contains the foundations and it contains
the most recent and up-to-date knowledge
that has encountered reality it has gone
out there and entered the battles it
makes sense because it works it is also
infinitely creative there is no end to
exploring the space
and it provides you with true
intellectual self defense
you can be given an idea a move and you
know what logically it takes to go from
that idea to elsewhere the view of
epistemology constrains everything but
at the same time it requires that the
known laws of physics constrain the
epistemology what can be known and even
if the laws of physics themselves are
expressed in mathematics that
mathematics that is known as itself
constrained for our knowledge of
mathematics depends on what can be known
which is epistemology which is itself
bound by what minds and brains can do
what is computable which is the laws of
physics once again morality that's a
domain of knowledge about what should be
done but what should be done is bound by
what it is possible to do what it is
physically possible to do we're back to
physics again
what we can choose to do is bound by our
logic and by how knowledge is created
and knowledge is created by an
evolutionary process
both in biological evolution and in mind
as explanatory knowledge
if you don't have a worldview like this
whether as a writer a scientist a
business person or any person
then you can more readily become
incoherent in the technical logical
sense you may more readily contradict
yourself or leave open questions
your philosophy of science may be
missing so you might insist upon
believing certain metaphysical claims
all the while not knowing none of that
is knowable if you don't know some
limits of mathematics or science because
you ignore philosophy and epistemology
then you are apt to fall into scientism
or insist that reason reduces to
mathematical formulae for predicting the
future
lack of a world view or a more coherent
world view leaves you more prone to
simply picking and choosing in a
non-systematic way your outlook might
not even be a world view you may call
yourself a scientific thinker or a
rationalist but if your understanding of
science is disconnected from the whole
of the rest of knowledge
perhaps you regard the rest of knowledge
as being irrelevant like philosophy for
example
then you have taken a position a
philosophical stance while perhaps
denying you ever do philosophy and
denying that it's even important
mathematics is not everything science is
not everything philosophy is not
everything
even knowledge is not everything only
everything is everything and only all of
reality contains everything you should
aim to come to better understand reality
and understand everything you need to
knit together your world view into a
fabric of reality all the while
understanding even fabrics fray and
contain holes and can be added to
indefinitely
people are filled with contradictions
and inconsistencies but that does not
mean those contradictions are not a
problem and that correcting them when
they are noticed won't be helpful of
course it would be a coherent worldview
helps with this but it takes an
understanding of reality and in all
senses
abstract and physical knowledge and
matter what life computation and
information space and time mathematics
morality multiverses and minds are all
about one should aim to have some
understanding to some extent of how
philosophy epistemology morality
mathematics physics and biology can
cohere together
but why those things in particular
because they are fundamental they are
deep touching all or almost all other
areas of human interest a coherent
understanding of those allows for a
consistent approach to addressing and
solving the widest array of problems
what this means that there is no end to
science and no end to knowledge creation
or creation generally
what that entails is eternal optimism
problems will be encountered that's
inevitable but they will always be
soluble and those solutions lead to a
life and to a world of better problems
personally and civilizationally
the idea we do have
can have should aim for or indeed we'll
have some final once and for all answer
anywhere
implies an end of progress an end of
problem solving and it implies that some
will possess the final truth some dogma
to defend
and that only ever leads to tyranny the
notion that the truth is manifest
somehow but it cannot be
it can only be imperfectly understood
yet always better understood by
improving our explanations in the
direction of bringing us ever closer to
reality but that journey is infinite and
we're always just the beginning
[Music]
do
you